---
layout: post 
title: A Clockwork Universe and the Strike at Watertown Arsenal 
--- 
![taylor](/images/taylor.jpeg)

In 1908 Frederick Taylor (years before publishing his famous
book “The Principles of Scientific Management”) began studying workers
at an arsenal in Watertown, Massachusetts.  

####Frederick Taylor

Taylor was born in 1856 into an aristocratic family in Philadelphia.
After graduating from Philip Exeter Academy he rejected university and
instead chose to apprentice in a machine shop.  Taylor believed in Isaac
Newton’s idea of the clockwork universe.  In Newton’s mind the world was
a giant clock that was wound up by god at the beginning of time.  As the
clock ticked the universe unfolded in a predictable pattern according to
the laws of physics.  If we could understand the design of the clock, we
could understand and predict the future.  During his work as an engineer
Taylor became convinced that he could replace the “rules of thumb”
followed by most factory workers with a simple and repeatable processes
that would always achieve the same result.  Once the process was in
place and wound up it would run indefinitely like the clockwork
universe.  In 1893 Taylor left the machine shop to become a consultant
and on his way he stopped at the Watertown Arsenal.

####Watertown Arsenal

Watertown Arsenal was built in 1816 to hold ordinance for the US Army
and found itself at the center of a national scandal during the Civil
War when the commander used government money to build himself a lavish
mansion on the grounds.  After a congressional investigation he was
exiled to an arsenal in a western frontier town but managed to build an
even grander mansion just a few years later.

####Slide Rules and Stop Watches
![house](/images/house.jpeg)

Frederick Taylor came to Watertown with a stop watch and slide rule to
measure the way workers performed tasks on the factory floor.  Why was
it taking a worker fifty-three minutes to make a gun when Taylor was
certain it could be done in twenty-four?  He watched the workers and
diagramed the way they moved about the floor.  He wrote up a report that
described how the guns could be made in twenty-four minutes and hired
managers who would stand on the floor with stopwatches making sure
Taylor’s plans were carried out.

####The Strike At Watertown

In 1911 the workers at Watertown arsenal went on strike and Taylor’s
methods were heavily criticized across the country.  One of the workers
wrote “This we believe to be the limit of our endurance.  It is
humiliating to us, who have always tried to give the government the best
that was in us.  This method is un-American”.  Taylor had designed the
perfect system for making guns but the system was shutting down. 

![sweatshop](/images/sweatshop.jpeg)

The strike at Watertown turned into a congressional hearing on the
practices that Taylor was starting to spread.  A few months later Taylor
was brought in front of the committee to testify.  Taylor explained his
science around shoveling coal to the chairman of the committee William
Wilson. Taylor explained that “the ordinary pig-iron man is not suited
for shoveling coal because he is too stupid.  But a first-class man who
could lift a shovel weighing twenty one and a half pounds cold move a
pile of coal lickety-split”.  Wilson responded “but what about the
effects on a man who wasn’t first-class?”  Taylor replied that
“Scientific management has no place for a bird that can sing and won’t
sing”.  “We are not...”, the chairman responded, “dealing with horses
nor singing birds, but we are dealing with men who are part of society
and for whose benefit society is organized”.

####A Ban on Stopwatches

Watertown Arsenal was biased and unscientific.  The committee barred
management scientific to be used in government facilities and dismantled
the system that Taylor put in place at Watertown Arsenal.  Taylor had
created a system that increased productivity but ignored the people
doing the work.  At Ford people were working so hard they couldn’t get
out of bed the next day.   Hatred between managers and workers grew and
frequent strikes began canceling out any productivity gains.  A few
months later the House of Representatives created a law that banned the
use of stopwatches in factories.

Despite these setbacks the idea of a perfectly repeatable clockwork
universe resonated with the business world and Taylor’s ideas spread at
the time the world was looking for a way to shift from a system of craft
production to mass production.  Harvard created the first business
school in 1908 and Taylor’s teachings set the curriculum for the next
fifty years.  Despite events such as Watertown suggesting there must be
a better way to manage people this new class of professional managers
winded the clock and watched as it slowly ticked down.
